I like to think that watching YouTube
videos about cities and city planning is
just the first step towards making
positive changes in your community. Good
YouTube videos can give you an
introduction to a topic and provide you
with the information you need to form
your own conclusions about policies,
urban design, and more. YouTube videos
are a lot like going to one of those
cool science museums. You don't become
an expert in physics overnight, but you
learn a little and are maybe inspired to
learn and do more. This video is all
about that more. What is there beyond
watching a YouTube video? And no, my
answer is not leaving spicy Reddit
comments and creating memes. I mean, you
can do those things, but in this video,
I'm talking about the tangible real
world things you can do to have a more
measurable impact on your community.
I've organized this like a list,
starting with the easiest and ending
with the most time and effort. Everyone
has a different stopping point on this
ladder up, and that's okay. I'll even
tell you where I'm at now, and it's not
at the top. Let's climb the ladder after
the bike bill.
>> [bell]
>> Step one, vote in local elections. I
consider this one to be the easiest
because I'm assuming all of you are
already voting, right? We tend to get
really caught up in the national
political discourse, but local elections
are super important. Please do not skip
voting for city council, county board of
supervisors, and other local offices.
Take the time to read their policy
positions. You can even reach out with
questions. You may get a staff person
response if it's a bigger city, but it's
not a bad idea to ask about their
positions on housing, ask for
transportation, or whatever your issue
is, particularly if they haven't
outlined it in their policy positions.
Figure out where they stand and vote
accordingly. Step two, attend a meeting.
This is going to be a theme, but you
really need to show up if you want your
voice to be heard. Local governments
often host workshops or meetings about
planning issues. Maybe your city is
doing an update of their comprehensive
plan or refreshing their zoning code or
redesigning a corridor to be safer for
bikes and pedestrians. Maybe your
transit agency is holding a listening
session. All of these are excellent
opportunities to make an impact. The
setup of these meetings varies, but
they'll almost always have a way for you
to express your viewpoint. This could be
through facilitated activities, writing
your thoughts and submitting it, doing a
poll, or talking directly with local
planners and decision makers. They're
usually fun and a great way to shake off
some of your cynicism. You can see other
people that care about this stuff as
much as you do. You might even make a
new friend. You'll also meet people that
you absolutely absolutely disagree with,
but that's okay, too. It's good to hear
stories from the other side and know
what you're up against. One side note
here, but I would not recommend your
first meeting be a city council meeting
unless you've checked the agenda and
found that they're going to be talking
about something interesting to you. A
lot of the local sausage gets made
before it makes it to city council, and
doing testimony at the finish line of a
new plan or policy just may not have the
same impact. Another side note, there
will almost always be a sign-in sheet.
Definitely sign in. You'll be added to
an email list about the project and be
notified of future ways to provide
feedback. You want to do this. They
don't sell your email address. I
promise. I've hosted many of these
meetings myself and they really, really
don't. Step three, join a local advocacy
organization. Once you start attending
meetings, you'll probably be clued into
local organizations that advocate for
various positions. If you attend a
meeting where the focus is housing, you
might meet some folks from a local Yimi
group. There might be a strong town's
chapter representative there. Now, if
you're at a meeting about bikes, you
might meet someone from the local bike
coalition. Even smallish cities will
have some type of group you can join.
When you join a group like this, you'll
be added to a mailing list. They might
have a newsletter to keep you updated.
There might be meetings to hang out with
like-minded folks, organize, learn more,
and socialize. Obviously, an advocacy
organization will do some advocacy,
which might include giving public
comment at meetings, writing letters to
the editor or to local decision makers,
attending educational events, and more.
If it's say a bicycle organization, you
might take group rides or some other
event. You might engage in some protests
if things get heated. There's only one
way to find out, and that's to join.
Step four, join a local board,
commission, or committee. This is a
great way to get involved in local
government without switching careers or
running for office. Most cities have
committees that local community members
can join. Where I live, they're called
advisory bodies, and the city council
uses them as a way to get feedback on
proposals and policies before they make
it to the council level. There are
committees for all sorts of things like
parks and recreation, mass transit, and
architectural review. Then there are
bigger commissions, and the most
relevant to this video is the planning
commission. It's a commission instead of
a mere committee and has some actual
decision-making power over planning
matters. Decisions can still be appealed
to the city council, but it's an
important role. Planning commissioners
advise on comprehensive plan updates,
review and act upon subdivision maps,
zoning variances, and individual project
approval, among other tasks. This is the
step where I'm at now. I'm not a
planning commissioner, but a member of
my local act of transportation
committee. There was a posted vacancy,
and I applied for the position. I was
interviewed by the chair of the
committee and by two city council
members and eventually offered the
position. I get to be on a committee
filled with active transportation
advocates and advise city planning staff
on improvements to the local pedestrian
and bicycle network. It's super fun and
I'm so glad I made this leap. If you're
considering doing the same thing, check
out your local government's website and
look for the page on advisory bodies.
Just be aware that each city might call
it something different. Check for
vacancies and apply. Step five, start a
local advocacy organization. If your
community doesn't have one of these
organizations I mentioned above, or if
there's a gap in coverage, like say no
housing advocacy organization, go ahead
and start one. We're getting pretty far
up the ladder here, so I know this is
all starting a little bit scary, but
trust me when I say that you really
don't need more than a passion for the
topic and a willingness to organize
like-minded people. One of the students
who worked with me on these videos last
year, started Strongtown Santa Barbara,
and I got a front row seat as he decided
to do it, started an email list, held a
meeting, and was surprised that people
actually showed up and helped it
snowball from there. Now he's a real
mover and shaker in local Santa Barbara
politics, and his organization's
meetings are getting visited by council
members. Good job, Sully. Step six, run
for local office. I haven't really done
this, so I can't speak to this one with
personal experience. Well, okay. When I
was in my 20s, my council member died
and the replacement protocol was to go
to a special city council meeting and
make the case for why you should be the
replacement. Then the city council just
picked the replacement. I threw my hat
in the ring, made a speech, and came in
third out of five candidates. But I
wouldn't really count this as running
for office. Clearly, this is a big
commitment and a massive one in a large
city. You'll be knocking on doors all
the time, making phone calls, attending
meetings, wooing voters, all just to get
elected. Then as an elected official,
you'll be voting on critical policies
and issues facing your city. This is
definitely at the top of our ladder. I
will say that how much power you have as
a local elected official depends on the
form of government. In many cities, it's
run as a council manager form of
government. That means there's a
professional city manager who runs the
day-to-day operations of the city, while
the council directs the city manager on
policy and the direction of the city. In
this format, the mayor often has very
little extra power when compared to a
typical council member. In so-called
strong mayor cities, the mayor acts more
like a president and the council acts
more like a legislative body like US
Congress. Obviously, being an elected
official in a strong mayor system is a
lot more responsibility. Okay, time for
an introvert break. I know that all this
sounds like hell to a certain kind of
people, introverts. The idea of having
to leave your house in the evenings and
meet with people, people you might even
disagree with, may not sound appealing.
You really have to put yourself out
there. You might not know anyone when
you get started. The reality is that a
lot of this stuff does require
face-toface interaction, but there's
some ways to get involved that don't
require so much networking. First, you
can write emails to elected officials
and the advisory bodies I just
mentioned. I know that whenever I have
an upcoming active transportation
committee meeting, I get an agenda
packet that includes everything we'll be
talking about during the meeting. That
packet is required by law to be public
and community members can email their
comments on the packet. I then receive
those emails and read them before the
meeting. I find the emails to be really
helpful. I get to hear other people's
opinions and it helps me consider other
viewpoints. Send an email and see what
happens. While I did kind of make fun of
posting on Reddit in the beginning, I
think there's something valuable about
commenting positively to things like new
proposed housing projects or new bike
lanes on your community subreddit. For
better or worse, people use those
threads as barometers for public
opinion, and same positive reactions can
challenge existing perspectives. This
works on Next Door, too. Finally, there
are other tasks that don't involve
direct planning. You can volunteer to
paint over graffiti, clean up a park, or
do some other community task. Small
improvements done by volunteers adds up
and creates better places for everyone.
I want to mention another way to get
involved that's not really on the
participation ladder we talked about
before, and it's both extrovert and
introvert friendly. It's choosing to be
a city planner as a career. Become a
city planner. Now, this is definitely
not for everyone, but if you're
interested in making cities a better
place and you think you want to do it
for a job, well, this could be for you.
The cool thing about being a planner is
that there are lots of different
specializations. So you can focus, say,
on transportation planning, land use
planning, environmental planning, or
something else. You need a fair amount
of patience, though, because the time
between writing a plan and seeing its
effects can take a while. But speaking
from experience, it's a fun, rewarding
career that I would recommend. To get a
job in planning, you'll likely need a
degree in city planning, either a
bachelor's or master's degree. I have a
video and live streams about this topic
if you want to learn more. Also, there
are plenty of other professions that
touch on planning. Real estate
developers, architects, landscape
architects, engineers, urban designers,
lawyers with certain specialties, and
others all engage in the process of
planning during their day jobs. The big
takeaway from everything I've said so
far is that there are so many ways to
get involved, and I hope you can find a
way that makes sense for you. Cities are
better when there are more involved
citizens, and they're at their best when
the involved citizens mirror the views
and demographics of the city as a whole.
I say this because it wasn't always the
case. Here in the United States, we have
a history of not listening to low-income
residents and people of color when
making important decisions. One example
of this is the phase in our history
where a policy called Urban Renewal wre
havoc on our central cities. Urban
renewal is officially called the Housing
Act of 1949. And the purpose of the bill
was to eliminate slums and replace it
with higher quality housing.
Unfortunately, there's little to no
outreach done with the people who lived
in those neighborhoods about whether or
not they wanted to be evicted. Whole
neighborhoods disappeared and new public
housing went up in its place. Later, the
bill was modified so it became easier to
evict residents and transfer that land
to private developers for the
construction of things like urban
shopping malls. By the 1960s, public
opinion soured on urban renewal, and it
became clear among reformers that slum
Claris was unjust and unwarranted. At
the same time, the United States was
going through all sorts of social
upheaval as a result of the Vietnam War
and the civil rights movement.
Professional planning began to
understand that they needed to value all
voices in the process. And by the 1970s,
urban renewal was dead and replaced with
policies that required community input
first. I breezed through a lot of
history on a very important topic there.
I'll leave links to other videos I've
done that cover it in more detail. But
the key takeaway here is that the
general public has not always had a
voice in city planning, and we should
take advantage of all the rights and
responsibilities we have today.
And we should keep advocating for more
of a voice, particularly from those of
people who have been historically
marginalized and forgotten. The work
will never be done, but as we keep
becoming more fair and more
representative, the better our cities
will become.